#summary Recording timings of stages in stage ontologies

= Introduction =

This describes ongoing work on adding timings to stages. Contributions welcome.

= Background =

Developmental and life cycle stages can have their starts and ends defined by some combination of

 * marker structures of events (e.g. limb appearance, gastrulation)
 * timings (e.g. days post fertilization)

In complex organisms actual timings of marker structures may vary from organism to organism. Some species may be affected by temperature. It should therefore be understood that any time a precise time is associated with an event this refers to some reference/textbook structure, and actual timings may vary.

= Details =

== Properties/Relations ==

We use a number of annotation properties to connect stages to start/end timings or markers. Examples

 * start and end days post-fertilization
 * start and end days post coitum
 * months or years since birth
 * marker event

We use logically silent annotation properties because the correct OWL modeling is difficult. Applications can expand to OWL for their own purposes.

== Examples ==

Currently the most well-developed examples are in HsapDv

The HsapDv ontology includes OWL annotation assertion axioms that
describe the typical start and end boundaries for a stage in terms of
some unit and reference point. These can be thought of as class-level
relations.

In obo-format they are written as follows:

{{{
[Term]
id: HsapDv:0000048
name: 11th week post-fertilization human stage
def: "Fetal stage when the fetus is over 10 and under 11 weeks of development." [Bgee:curator "Bgee"] 
comment: The nose and lips are completely formed, and external genitalia can be distinguished as male or female (see http://ehd.org/resources_bpd_documentation_english.php). 
is_a: HsapDv:0000000 ! human life cycle stage
relationship: part_of HsapDv:0000197 ! third LMP month human stage
relationship: immediately_preceded_by HsapDv:0000047 ! 10th week post-fertilization human stage
property_value: start_dpf "70.0" xsd:float
property_value: end_dpf "77.0" xsd:float
xref: EV:0300030
}}}

Note that these will not be visible in obo-edit - we recommend you
view the OWL version.

== Expansion in OWL ==

As these are OWL annotations, they are logically silent. They are
designed to be used to generare OWL axioms that are useful for
particular applications. OPPL scripts will be provided for this.

One possibility is to generate hasValue axioms - e.g.

{{{
Class: '11th week post-fertilization human stage'
SubClassOf: 'has start, days post-fertilization' value 70.0^^xsd:float
}}}

This may not be appropriate for the Carnegie stages, which are defined
by markers, and may vary in the time of their appearance from
individual to individual.

Another possibility is to make the units and reference point
explicit, for example:

{{{
Class: '11th week post-fertilization human stage'
SubClassOf: 
  'starts at end of' 
     (duration and 'starts at end of' some fertilization and 
      'has duration some (owl-time:days 70))
}}}

Note with all explicit OWL representations we run into the
co-reference issue; all timings are assumed to be relative to a
particular life cycle.